Release notes 2023.9 (#28809)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_posts/2023-09-06-release-20239.markdown

<a href='/integrations/#version/2023.9'><img src='/images/blog/2023-09/social.png' style='border: 0;box-shadow: none;'></a>

Home Assistant Core 2023.9! 🎉

Frenck is enjoying a well earned holiday, so I'm taking care of the release this month.

> This release is pretty packed! With some very nice updates to the UI with a new more info for climate entities, and a lot of tile card features.Template sensors that can be created from the UI now, and for the more advanced template sensors the ability to get data from services!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This month on the 17th it has been 10 years since Home Assistant started. We'll be publishing a video to the [Home Assistant YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCbX3YkedQunLt7EQAdVxh7w) to celebrate, reflect and look ahead. We hope you can join us on the 17th @ 12:00 PDT / 21:00 CET!

This release is pretty packed! With some very nice updates to the UI with a new more info for climate entities, and a lot of tile card features.Template sensors that can be created from the UI now, and for the more advanced template sensors the ability to get data from services!
```

Reviewer 2: When integration this change. Also make sure to add a space between "features.Template"

<a href='/integrations/#version/2023.9'><img src='/images/blog/2023-09/social.png' style='border: 0;box-shadow: none;'></a>

Home Assistant Core 2023.9! 🎉

Frenck is enjoying a well earned holiday, so I'm taking care of the release this month.

> This month on the 17th it has been 10 years since Home Assistant started. We'll be publishing a video to the [Home Assistant YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCbX3YkedQunLt7EQAdVxh7w) to celebrate, reflect and look ahead. We hope you can join us on the 17th @ 12:00 PDT / 21:00 CET!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This month, on the 17th, it has been 10 years since Home Assistant started. We'll be publishing a video to the [Home Assistant YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCbX3YkedQunLt7EQAdVxh7w) to celebrate, reflect and look ahead. We hope you can join us on the 17th @ 12:00 PDT / 21:00 CET!
```

> This release is pretty packed! With some very nice updates to the UI with a new entity dialogs for climate entities, and lots of tile card features. Template sensors that can be created from the UI now, and for the more advanced template sensors the ability to get data from services!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This release is pretty packed! With some very nice updates to the UI with new entity dialogs for climate entities and lots of tile card features. Template sensors can be created from the UI now, and for the more advanced template sensors, the ability to get data from services!
```

A new service to get the weather forecast, and better options to display different forecasts.

> And something you will probably not see when you are already using Home Assistant, the onboarding flow is completely redesigned!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
And something you will probably not see when you are already using Home Assistant: the onboarding flow is completely redesigned!
```

I absolutely love it!

Enjoy the release!

Bram

<!--more-->

> - [New climate, humidifier and water heater entity dialogs](#new-climate-humidifier-and-water-heater-entity-dialogs)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [New climate, humidifier, and water heater entity dialogs](#new-climate-humidifier-and-water-heater-entity-dialogs)
```

## Climate, humidifier and water heater more info

The more info screen for climate, humidifier and water heater entities got an update, if you ask me, it looks absolutely stunning!
They now have a newly designed circular slider, that shows the current temperature and the target temperature. And allows you to swipe to the desired target temperature easily.
There are also dedicated buttons to change the target, so it easy to use if you are not using a touchscreen.

> It will glow in the middle to show it's current action, when it is heating or cooling for example.

Reviewer 4: Screenshot should must `hvac_action`

<lite-youtube videoid="JSNRrWk9IHs" videotitle="Home Assistant 2023.9 Release Party"></lite-youtube>

> ## New climate, humidifier and water heater entity dialogs

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## New climate, humidifier, and water heater entity dialogs
```

> The entity dialogs for climate, humidifier and water heater entities got an update, if you ask me, it looks absolutely stunning!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The entity dialogs for climate, humidifier, and water heater entities got an update, and if you ask me, it looks absolutely stunning!
```

> It now has a newly designed circular slider, that shows the current temperature and the target temperature. And allows you to swipe to the desired target temperature easily.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It now has a newly designed circular slider showing the current and target temperatures and allows you to easily swipe to the desired target temperature.
```

> It now has a newly designed circular slider showing the current and target temperatures and allows you to easily swipe to the desired target temperature. And allows you to swipe to the desired target temperature easily.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
It now has a newly designed circular slider showing the current and target temperatures and allows you to easily swipe to the desired target temperature.
```

> There are also dedicated buttons to change the target, so it easy to use if you are not using a touchscreen.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are also dedicated buttons to change the target, so it is easy to use if you are not using a touchscreen.
```

> It will glow in the middle to show it's current action, when it is heating or cooling for example.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It will glow in the middle to show its current action, for example, when it is heating or cooling.
```

<p class='img'>
<img src='/images/blog/2023-09/climate-card.png'>
Screenshot of the more info dialog of a climate entity.
</p>

## Lots of new tile features

The tile card gets many new features this release.

> The features of a tile card are a great way to bring more functionalities directly into your dashboard, without having the need to open the more info dialog.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The features of a tile card are a great way to bring more functionalities directly into your dashboard without needing to open the more info dialog.
```

- HVAC mode
- Water heater mode
- Temperature control
- Cover position
- Cover tilt
- Lawn mower commands
- Color temperature

<p class='img'>
<img src='/images/blog/2023-09/tile-features.png'>
Screenshot of tile cards with the new features.
</p>

## Lawn mower

> A new entity component was added this release, the lawn mower!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A new entity type was added to this release: the lawn mower!
```

We general don't refer to it as entity component in the release notes/user end in the past years but as an entity type.

> A new entity type was added to release: the lawn mower!

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A new entity type was added this release: the lawn mower!
```

> You can now integrate your lawn mower in Home Assistant!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can now integrate your lawn mower into Home Assistant!
```

Never worry about the lawn mower when it starts raining, you can now automate it to stop and go back when it rains.

> For now just MQTT is supported, but keep an eye out for other integrations!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For now, just MQTT is supported, but keep an eye out for other integrations!
```

> Never worry about the lawn mower when it starts raining, you can now automate it to stop and go back when it rains.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Never worry about the lawn mower when it starts raining, you can now automate the lawn mower to stop and go back when it rains.
```

## Climate, humidifier and water heater more info

The more info screen for climate, humidifier and water heater entities got an update, if you ask me, it looks absolutely stunning!

> They now have a newly designed circular slider, that shows the current temperature and the target temperature. And allows you to swipe to the desired target temperature easily.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It now has a newly designed circular slider, that shows the current temperature and the target temperature. And allows you to swipe to the desired target temperature easily.
```

Reviewer 2: It being "_The more info screen for climate, humidifier and water heater entities_"

- Color temperature

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

The features of a tile card are a great way to bring more functionalities directly into your dashbaord, without having the need to open the more info dialog.

```

All variables from the action block will be available in the template.

An example that checks at midnight if you have something on your calendar tomorrow and sets a binary sensor:

{% raw %}

```yaml
template:
  - trigger:
      - platform: time
        at: "00:00:00"
    action:
      - service: calendar.list_events
        target:
          entity_id: calendar.calendar
        data:
          start_date_time: "{{ today_at() + timedelta(days=1) }}"
          duration:
            hours: 24
        response_variable: events
    binary_sensor:
      - name: Calendar events tomorrow
        state: "{{ events.events is defined and events.events | count > 0 }}"
```

{% endraw %}

## Weather forecast service

We added a new service for weather entities, `weather.get_forecast`, that responds with the weather forecast.

Previously you would have to look at the `forecast` attribute of a weather entity to get the forecast, now this can be done by calling a new service, `weather.get_forecast`, that will respond with the forecast.

> You can also specify what type of forecast you want, do you want to see the forecast by day or do you want to know it for every hour? This means you no longer need separate entities for every forecast type, but it can all be done in 1 entity.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
You can also specify what type of forecast you want. Do you want to see the forecast by day or do you want to know it for every hour? This means you no longer need separate entities for every forecast type, but it can all be done in 1 entity.
```

All weather integrations are updated to support this new service.

<p class='img'>
<img src='/images/blog/2023-09/get-forecast-service.png'>
Screenshot of service developer tools showing the weather forecast service.
</p>

If an entity supports multiple forecasts, you can choose which forecast you want to see in the more info dialog.
In the weather card in your dashboard, you can also now pick what kind of weather forecast you want to show in that card.

<p class='img'>
<img src='/images/blog/2023-09/weather-more-info.png'>
Screenshot of the weather more info dialog.
</p>

With this change, the `forecast` attribute of the weather entity is deprecated, and will be removed in Home Assistant Core 2024.3.

> This will make it possible to have on-demand forecasts, that update when you want them to, instead of them being updated all time. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This will make it possible to have on-demand forecasts, that update when you want them to, instead of them being updated all the time. 
```

You can use the newly added `action` part of a template entity to fetch the forecast and use it in your template:

{% raw %}

```yaml
template:
  - trigger:
      - platform: time
        at: "00:00:00"
    action:
      - service: weather.get_forecast
        target:
          entity_id: weather.home
        data:
          type: daily
        response_variable: forecast
    binary_sensor:
      - name: Is it going to rain?
        state: "{{ forecast.forecast[0].precipitation > 0 }}"
```

{% endraw %}

## Onboarding

While it is certain that Home Assistant is a great tool once you understand how it works, one part that was often overlooked is its associated learning curve.
We are now actively working to flatten that curve so that you can get more from your home faster and simpler. 
This release shows the first result of that effort, a new onboarding flow.

> Something you probably have not seen for a while, but we gave our onboarding a fresh new look! It is shortened to get the user in Home Assistant as fast as possible, so they can enjoy tinkering with their home faster!

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Something you probably have not seen for a while, but we gave our onboarding a fresh new look! It is shortened to get the users in Home Assistant as fast as possible, so they can enjoy tinkering with their home faster!
```

</p>

If an entity supports multiple forecasts, you can choose which forecast you want to see in the more info dialog.
In the weather card in your dashboard, you can also now pick what kind of weather forecast you want to show in that card.

<p class='img'>
<img src='weather-more-info.png'></a>
Temporary screenshot that needs to be replaced.
</p>

With this change, the `forecast` attribute of the weather entity is deprecated, and will be removed in Home Assistant Core 2024.3.
This will make it possible to have on-demand forecasts, that update when you want them to, instead of them being updated all time. It will also make the system faster. 

You can use the newly added `action` part of a template entity to fetch the forecast and use it in your template:

{% raw %}

```yaml
template:
  - trigger:
      - platform: time
        at: "00:00:00"
    action:
      - service: weather.get_forecast
        target:
          entity_id: weather.home
        data:
          type: daily
        response_variable: forecast
    binary_sensor:
      - name: Is it going to rain?
        state: "{{ forecast.forecast[0].precipitation > 0 }}"
```

{% endraw %}

## Onboarding

> Our onboarding got a fresh new look and it is now easier to get started with Home Assistant!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While it is certain that Home Assistant is a great tool once you understand how it works, one part that was often overlooked is its associated learning curve.

We are now actively working to flatten that curve so that you can get more from your home faster and simpler. 
This release shows the first result of that effort, a new onboarding flow.
```

> With the preview, you see a live update of the sensors value while you are writing the template.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With the preview, you see a live update of the sensor value while writing the template.
```

<p class='img'>
<img src='/images/blog/2023-09/template-sensor.png'>
Screenshot of creating a template sensor.
</p>

## Actions for trigger template entities

Trigger template entities can now have an action block that is executed after the trigger but before the entities are rendered.

> This will allow users to fetch things like calendar events, weather forecast using services with responses and use them in their template entities. You can even use OpenAI to set the value of your entities now!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This will allow users to fetch things like calendar events and weather forecasts using services with responses and use them in their template entities. You can even use OpenAI to set the value of your entities now!
```

All variables from the action block will be available in the template.

> An example that checks at midnight if you have something in your calendar tomorrow and sets a binary sensor:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An example that checks at midnight if you have something on your calendar tomorrow and sets a binary sensor:
```

{% raw %}

```yaml
template:
  - trigger:
      - platform: time
        at: "00:00:00"
    action:
      - service: calendar.list_events
        target:
          entity_id: calendar.calendar
        data:
          start_date_time: "{{ today_at() + timedelta(days=1) }}"
          duration:
            hours: 24
        response_variable: events
    binary_sensor:
      - name: Calendar events tomorrow
        state: "{{ events.events is defined and events.events | count > 0 }}"
```

{% endraw %}

> ## Weather forecast service

Reviewer 6: I think it would be worth adding some of the context from this post by @bdraco as it may head off the inevitable concerns about this change: https://community.home-assistant.io/t/petition-dont-delete-the-forecast-attribute/609298/150

Reviewer 6: This also would help, specifically explaining how weather cards will work: https://community.home-assistant.io/t/petition-dont-delete-the-forecast-attribute/609298/159

We added a new service for weather entities, `weather.get_forecast`, that responds with the weather forecast.

Previously you would have to look at the `forecast` attribute of a weather entity to get the forecast, now this can be done by calling a new service, `weather.get_forecast`, that will respond with the forecast.
You can also specify what type of forecast you want, do you want to see the forecast by day or do you want to know it for every hour? This means you no longer need separate entities for every forecast type, but it can all be done in 1 entity.

All weather integrations are updated to support this new service.

<p class='img'>
<img src='/images/blog/2023-09/get-forecast-service.png'>
Screenshot of service developer tools showing the weather forecast service.
</p>

If an entity supports multiple forecasts, you can choose which forecast you want to see in the more info dialog.
In the weather card in your dashboard, you can also now pick what kind of weather forecast you want to show in that card.

<p class='img'>
<img src='/images/blog/2023-09/weather-more-info.png'>
Screenshot of the weather more info dialog.
</p>

> With this change, the `forecast` attribute of the weather entity is deprecated, and will be removed in Home Assistant Core 2024.3.
> This will make it possible to have on-demand forecasts, that update when you want them to, instead of them being updated all time. It will also make the system faster. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
With this change, the `forecast` attribute of the weather entity is deprecated, and will be removed in Home Assistant Core 2024.3.
This will make it possible to have on-demand forecasts, that update when you want them to, instead of them being updated all time. It will also make the system faster; all state data gets sent to your browser or mobile app every time it is open or woken so that the frontend can re-sync with the backend, and the forecast attribute made weather entities the equivalent of e.g. 100 other entities from a disk I/O, memory, and performance perspective.
While the way to access this data has changed and may impact your automations, you will not experience any loss in functionality. Even with this change, rest assured that the forecast cards in your dashboard will still work, they will now just use the service to retrieve the forecast data asynchronously instead of reading it from the locally stored state attribute. The end result is that your dashboards will load faster, and the frontend will be leaner.
```

Open to changes here but trying to incorporate some of @bdraco 's explanation from the threads I linked above

- Support for soil moisture sensors was added to the [Gardena] integration.
  Thanks [@elupus]!
- [@timmo001] added a power service to the [System Bridge] integration. Thanks!

> - If you change your password you will be asked if you want to logout everywhere
> - The file and image upload elements have been revamped

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- If you change your password, you will be asked if you want to logout everywhere.
- The file and image upload elements have been revamped.
```

> - CO2Signal has been renamed to ElectricityMaps

Reviewer 3: Wasn't this already done last release? (It was even listed as a breaking change).

> - You can now sort the options of an input select entity thanks [@karwosts]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- You can now sort the options of an input select entity. Thanks [@karwosts]!
```

> - Local bluetooth has been optimized and is now faster, thanks [@bdraco]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Local Bluetooth has been optimized and is now faster, thanks [@bdraco]
```
